so thanks for coming on Jane no worries
it's been awhile since we last talked
let me do that for the week but ya crazy
time since then yeah kid can you fill me
in on on so I think the last time we
talked you were with Dallas fuel right
mhm yeah so I'm still as far as I can
announce I'm still with Dallas okay yeah
so I am going to be moving to Dallas in
November okay and then right now I'm in
Toronto for the Team Canada boot camp
okay so over active media and Bell
Canada sponsored us to come up to
Toronto to just a one week before the
World Cup to get ready for the
tournaments down in Anaheim California
there Team USA has had Nvidia as a
sponsor the last two or three years and
they've had a pretty nice boot camp set
up so actually being in person and
having the full team there instead of
trying to practice remote which is you
know usually standard fare especially
for not just basically everyone except
the league teams practices remotely but
it is really quite a big jump up once
you are able to get everybody in the
same location you know live together eat
together practice together that whole
thing so yeah the we're on day three the
first scrim block starts in about an
hour and a half mmm oh yeah so this is
day three and then we're gonna have
media day tomorrow one final kind of
prep day to simulate the actual
tournament itself and then we're down to
Anaheim túcume to compete at the World
Cup that's awesome
and how have you been oh I've been doing
I've been really really busy there's a
you know normally people know me for my
twitch of my youtube stuff but pretty
much the only social media that I've
been active on recently has been Twitter
not because I like I'm feeling a lot
better I had that I stepped back from
social media because I was having a
pretty high period of stress I guess you
could call it social media earlier in
the year but the reason that I haven't
fully returned to it yet is yes there's
these things with like World Cup where
I'm up at the bootcamp but I'm also
working on some still secret projects
that I want to
finish off and hopefully I can announce
the some of those in November but yeah
looking to return to the actual twitch
and YouTube stuff probably late November
early December it's one of those things
where there's there's a lot of things
that can be done in the overwatch
ecosystem I suppose the best way to put
it you know if you're looking at like
the National Hockey League or something
like that they're still figuring things
out after a hundred years now the
overwatch league has sprung into
existence we just finished the second
year and so while it it's quite large
and impressive with a lot of franchise
teams there's still a lot of things that
need to be done down kind of like the
the foundation is the overwatch league
you know there's a lot of there's a lot
of just checks and balances that aren't
in place yet um you know there's no
Union for developers of games there's no
Players Association and for players
whether it's whether you're talking
overwatch Blizzard or any Activision
game things like that you know the major
difference between you have like the NBA
where you know anybody like if you play
let's take baseball for example if you
wanted to go play a game of baseball all
you really need is a bat a ball and you
know white spray paint in a grass field
but overwatch League in any sport really
any and every eastward is a little bit
different where in order to have the
permission to play the game you need to
have a license to the game access to the
server's which means you need Terms of
Service and user license agreements and
then those legal protections also extend
to the point where companies have
control over running tournaments and
events
you can't like even if you and all of
their friends own overwatch at the game
technically you can't run a tournament
without blizzards permission so there's
some differences in legal structures
where although we're modeling the
overwatch League and we being not me
personally but although the overwatch
League is being modeled after these
large franchise sports leagues there are
some very key structural differences
which I don't feel you know they haven't
been figured out yet we're still you
know we're going for broke we're
figuring out as we go along but yeah
there's there's more to be done
that could make the league a lot better
yeah so I mean I think you know the last
time we talked I got a substantial
appreciation for just how different
things are in terms of players as well
like I didn't realize sort of the
cognitive impact of becoming a
professional overwatch player at the age
of 18 and kind of like what that does to
you and I remember kind of at that
workshop you know a lot of people were
just talking a lot about sort of
managing teams and how that's difficult
is there is that so generally speaking I
guess people on this stream like we tend
to try to talk a lot about people's
personal experiences because I think
that's what people find helpful and you
were saying that things have been
stressful can you tell us a little bit
about what's been stressful
[Applause]
that's a very blood I mean everything
has its own level of stress you're doing
yeah you know for you know it's I've got
the Team Canada thing going on we're
obviously competing on the world stage
literally next week I work for Dallas as
a coach I'm doing other duties that I
haven't announced yet
and then there's their stress behind
that obviously it's an organization
that's trying to make basically the
future of sports in general and then on
top of that I have my my side project I
wouldn't even really call it side
projects I start up organization that's
trying to support kind of the more
semi-professional the path to pro
helping people focusing on education
through eSports so you know I wear a lot
of different hats because I'm super
passionate about the stuff and I want to
make it better and I want to make it
work so is there any specific component
of that that you'd like me to delve into
it yeah so let's start with this one
yeah so like let's let's start with I
guess a couple of things one is you know
how you balance different things so like
there's a particular stress from trying
to do more than one thing yeah so so
what when you say you're really bad at
that what does that mean well
like basically that for myself I was
operating for quite a long time
undiagnosed bipolar - and I didn't
realize that that's still something
that's relatively new to me and I'm
still trying to figure out how to cope
with it but whenever I would be on the
elevated side of bipolar - you know it
wouldn't be like a full-blown mania and
you know no delusions of grandeur
disassociation nothing like that it was
just elevated mood elevated productivity
motivation passion like just super
energetic all the time and that's one of
the reasons that if I just like saw a
problem or saw something that I could do
I just like jump right into it with with
no regard to my health at all
you know there's a lot of people I think
do that that get really really
passionate or really really competitive
and you know you do hear about these
guys grinding 8 to 12 hours and honestly
that's kind of the conservativeness
there's definitely people who push kind
of like 16 20 hour sessions especially
when they're grinding really really hard
you know just like the guys here at the
Team Canada I was like you know working
in person and we're making sure that
they're fed and they have asleep and
we're all kind of do go to bed at same
time but there are some people who play
until like 4:00 in the morning or
something with that and then they're the
first ones up and the first thing to do
after they do their morning routine is
just hop right back on and keep going so
we've got these really intense days
where we're doing you know three blocks
of overwatch and review and prep and
discussions and then they're putting in
two different sets of our play sessions
before and after not the boot camps
completely voluntarily so Jane I've I've
got a question for you if I wanted to
find
I if I had if I wanted to find so
there's an average rate of bipolar - in
the US population and if I wanted to
find a group of people that had a rate
of bipolar - three three times the rate
of the average do you know where I could
look like where am I gonna find people
who who are three times more likely to
have bipolar - no actually Harvard
College really yes
that's it think about that for a second
yeah it's a like I'm obviously not a
professor of psychology but you know
it's it comes to myself I was went to
the military college and sometimes I see
it where people kind of compartmentalize
especially in mission oriented tasks
like people who you know in the military
it's all about the mission it's like you
accumulate stress while you're doing
your job or doing what was assigned and
you do that and then afterwards you kind
of like decompress and you can just like
try and get yourself back to normal so
you can take the same mission and I do
see that same kind of drive sometimes at
least within the realm of eSports as
well and that people especially when
they get into the mindset that like they
you know they need to win it's not that
they want to win it's not like they want
to be the best they want to win and
that's a never-ending mission to them
and they really do you know push
themselves well past what anyone would
consider healthy at least in terms of
physical limitations how do you think
that affects their their performance
this is one of the things that I'm
really interested in is I think that it
negatively affects their performance
quite a bit you know you had super in
Sinatra going on The Tonight Show with
Jimmy Fallon and Jimmy Fallon did this
really brief kind of super
commercialized formatted interview with
them at the end he asked them if they
had any advice for like people who
wanted to also become pro gamers and
then super as a piece of advice was you
know you need to keep your life in
balance like you know he had a pretty
good answer but then Sinatra kind of
added to that he's like yeah but in
addition to keeping your life in balance
if you really want to be the best need
to grind eight to twelve hours a day on
top of that and it was like that math
just doesn't work out so you're these
kids you know like they're you can get
into the overwatch League on their 18th
birthday and the superstars usually do
but that means that these guys have been
grinding this game since they were 15
and they've been spending you know eight
to twelve hours you know you most days
of the week grinding to be this good
that's before they start getting on
teams and it's really all they know and
nobody has really taught them life
skills or soft skills and especially
when you're looking at like a field like
aviation you know my background is in
the Air Force as a pilot
the stat I think the most common staff
thrown away is that you would do four
hours of prep work for one hour of
performance or one hour of flight time
and there is this component where you
know the eight to 12 hours it's its
practice yes but there's also a
differences where it's like practice
doesn't make perfect perfect practice
makes perfect and I think that the
efficiency and just the way that people
are going about trying to improve at the
game is really incredibly inefficient
and I feel you know even things like
drills review focused practice on
specific areas different ways of
thinking like paradigm shifts rather
than what's the best way to explain this
you know I was I've worked with an
individual who
I didn't finish you know it's kind of I
would love to see a statistic it's
probably the one statistic the league
doesn't really want public but it's the
amount of people who either dropped out
of high school or who finished high
school online it's kind of like you know
given either course loads that you can
pursue your passion whatever it is
that's fine but you know I've had I've
worked with pro players who don't know
how to take notes things like that you
know looking at the game footage and
asking them to take notes of things that
they want to look after things that they
noticed or something and like they don't
they can't they don't know how so Jane
what what I'm hearing you say is that
like people don't know how to learn yes
well nobody's taught them you know yeah
it's a skill problem-solving is a skill
the scientific method wasn't developed
until the Enlightenment period before
that you know nobody really knew that
it's the same sort of thing scientific
thinking learning how to learn learning
how to fail gracefully learning how to
improve all those things are not skills
that are taught and right now there is a
significant number of people I think who
put in so many hours into the game
without thinking that they become purely
instinctual creatures or machines in the
fact that if they can do some pretty
incredible things and they'll you know
flank at the right time or do some
action that's a you know something that
I was like I don't see the connection
that they saw in order to actually pull
that play off but they don't either
they just know it was the right thing to
do at that time they can't articulate it
they can't explain it something about
the context of that play made sense in
their brain but it wasn't a focused
effort in order to figure out a play and
practice it through repetition it was
just kind of like over the multiple
thousands of hours I have in this game I
know that this is the right thing to do
at this point in time so it's it's very
weird kind of working with you know I
work in the world where or I worked
previous in the world of standard
operating procedures and workflows and
things like that where you know flight
safety if a plane goes down we review
all of our procedures and you never
assume that the pilot is at fault
there's things like your planes
themselves or to find no sign to not
only be triple redundant but also to fly
despite the best intentions of the
pilots that's the joke so something
fails and something goes wrong we
usually blame
the training we blame the workflows we
blame procedures we blame hardware the
last thing we blame as the pilot it's
how is that different from esports well
it's it's almost the exact opposite in
the fact that not only do we not blame
the training or anything like that but
there is no really defined way or an
accepted way of training educating and
coaching teams you know at the at the
league level sure some people okay what
is that what does that blame look like
so like let's say that you guys like
let's say that there's a team that you
know you guys had a disappointing
performance or you guys are screaming
and things aren't going well or you know
during like a particular run or
tournament things don't go well how does
that how does that look terms of you
know when you say like you blame
everything in in the Air Force you guys
blame everything except for the pilot
and in eSports and this has been my
experience as well that a lot of blame
falls on individuals there are
personality conflicts players will blame
once again they won't blame the system
in which they approach things they'll
blame each other organizations will
blame players like people will dogpile
some players like this is stuff that
I've seen like how does that play out
I mean you said it yourself all those
things have happened I don't want to
talk too much about the league level
there's any time I talk about the league
level people automatically assume that
the things that I'm saying are thinly
veiled references to the fuel so like I
don't mean to avoid topics I've got I've
got a lot of friends in both at the
player level and staff level for other
teams you know it's we talk sit we know
what's going on on other teams in terms
of like the you know it's not like
leaking confidential information or vods
or anything like that but you know
people know and people are having a
rough time or when there's conflict
between individuals and it's pretty
common yeah so let me ask you this then
then and and thanks for letting me know
you know what's okay or not okay to talk
about because I understand that you know
at the end of the day you're working for
a team and you're trying to be
competitive and you're trying to train
them to win then you don't want to you
know give up that competitive advantage
and or talk trash let me ask you this so
when you're dealing like is it can we
ask you a little bit about how you deal
with that like as a person like if you
notice that people are not like so you
have this Air Force training and other
people are instinctively moving towards
like blaming each other how do you how
do you try to move people from their way
of thinking into this other way of
thinking is that we're fronting do you
want it do you want this theoretical
like how I would do it because
technically the league level I'm an
assistant so there's you know I don't
get to fix things myself is that my way
of thinking my military background the
way that I would approach these problems
is subservient to Aero and the fact that
I'm there to assist Aero so sure what he
says in his approach to the team goes
but then there's times where like to get
into the league this is also kind of a
an interesting is that a lot of people
wow how much of a tangent do I want to
go on here go on the tangent baby go for
it okay so not far far away there is
everybody has a different approach to it
some players have different approaches
of games some coaches have driven to the
plays
and think I cut out there didn't I yeah
just for a second you're back okay but
tier two looking at it sometimes feels
almost like a lottery in the fact that
you know people try and assemble the
best ways that they can but there's a
lot of teams at the at the tier 2 level
that just kind of end up player coached
and then it almost feels like the
coaches themselves who are attached to
the teams are playing lottery and the
fact that when you have eight teams
competing one of them has to win and if
you're the coach of that you know team
that happened to win even if it was a
player-coach team you get to take credit
for that victory and then the next tier
up kind of looks at you so there's it
kind of like there's a lot of almost
going through the motions and that's
largely because there is no one accepted
way of coaching a team and any kind of
team that does feel like they've figured
out how to run a team and how to
actually work on player development
they're obviously not going to share
that information so player development
is something that is talked a lot about
but in the league and of the
semi-professional player it RN at the
semi-professional level it feels like
people are almost playing the lottery or
trading stocks where they're kind of if
you're not good enough they'd rather
just trade a player for a better player
and then instead of trying to work on
that player develop them or build them
up into order to be you know a dynasty
of a team there's very little focus on
player development and it's more of like
if you're not working and they're good
develops interpersonal issues just get
them the hell off my team so that we can
start again script start again fresh
absolutely I this yes this this
knowledge just isn't here it's not
endemic there's no institutional
knowledge you know what that sounds
actually a lot like so this sounds a lot
like Investment Banking to be completely
honest
so investment banking it's pretty much
what it is investment banking for you
guys don't know as a field that has a
real problem with retention so like
people go into Investment Banking they
work crazy hours and I think it's
bizarre how similar investment banking
is to eSports and is even more similar
to eSports than actually real sports so
I work with a few NFL players and the
NFL is like
completely different from esports the
first thing is that in the NFL you have
physical limitations on how much you can
practice right so like people train for
like 4 to 6 7 hours a day the people who
work really hard will watch a lot of
game tape and things like that but it's
still like basically like an 8 or 10 or
maybe 12 hour day but for some people
it's like a four hour day and people
train really hard and they're very
thoughtful and especially like good
quarterbacks will spend a lot of time
like reviewing game tape and things like
that but what this release and the other
thing about the NFL is like you don't
have like rampant player trading right
so you'll have like people will trade
and things like that but generally
speaking like you look at you know and
the NFL is about building dynasties just
like like Jane said Jane's like you know
in eSports people don't focus on
building dynasties the NBA is like
people like it's about building like a
cohesive team that you can run with like
think about Brady I mean I'm from Boston
so Tom Brady and the Patriots is about
building like a dynasty like a team of
people that will carry you to win title
after title after title after title
and in investment banking it's actually
the complete opposite so what happens is
you have a bunch of people who and I
think this happens in eSports as well
where you basically have an astronomical
success curve where like you'll have
people who like finish college right and
they've like they'll be like they have
essentially no net worth and they'll
move to New York City and they'll start
making like 200 to 250 K a year and
within 5 or 7 years they'll be making
700 K 800 K and then hopefully within a
decade or a little over a decade they're
gonna be making like seven figures so
just the the the
the difference between like 22 and 23 is
just astronomic and I see that in
eSports as well whereas like you've got
this eighteen-year-old kid who's like
bailing out a call like school right
he's like struggling to graduate because
he plays a game all day like whether it
be lul or overwatch or whatever and then
he lands a contract for like one 25k a
year or two 50k a year and this is a kid
who like doesn't have expenses like he
just sits at home and plays video games
and so that has its own stress and then
what happens is you start to get this
sort of situation where like an
investment banking you have a big
problem with retention so people feel
like they're undervalued or they feel
like they're not being treated or
utilized correctly and so they move and
so banks have a big problem with sort of
keeping the good people and losing the
bad people so they want to keep all the
people they perceive as good but the
people they perceive as good or are
gonna want to be shopping around a
little bit because they feel like they
can get a better offer elsewhere and the
flip side of it is they'll fire the
people who they think are bad but then
those people will travel to another
organization and either do bad there or
they'll find a right team they'll find a
different system they'll find a
different approach they'll have like a
manager who's a little bit more
compassionate and works on them as a
person and then they'll rise to the top
and they'll do really well so there's
the kind of this bizarre situation where
people are like looking at a system plus
a person and they're making a judgement
about the person instead of like
thinking at all about the system because
that is generally speaking in investment
banking like people are you know there's
a bell curve but like most people are
pretty good
and I've seen so much variance even
within an individual person like if you
stick one person their work product on a
particular team is gonna be way better
than the work product on another team
and that's because of the way that the
team functions like the way that the
reporting structure functions the way
that so I'll give you guys just one
really simple example so when you have a
junior team member
sometimes senior people will schedule
important meetings without them and one
of the simplest things you can do in
Investment Banking to get the most out
of your junior people is just not leave
them out like it's such a simple thing
but it like happens so rarely where I
was talking and and just include the
junior people on your team and then they
feel like they're a part of the team
instead of feeling like they're like a
monkey who's just they're like building
financial models in the basement for you
and then they're gonna give you that
extra mile and your team will do way
better but a lot of people in banking
just don't think about that they're just
like oh I wasn't invited to meetings
when I was junior person so I'm gonna
ignore my junior person and like and
then they start complaining when this
person doesn't seem to be doing a good
job because you haven't inspired them to
work and that sounds a lot like what
you're describing where people are in
like go ahead no if you can yes yes yeah
so I mean I think one thing to just
remember which which I really come to
appreciate is that if you want to get
the most out of a team member or
employee just remember that - like
people value - things people want to be
appreciated and people want to be
utilized
I think that like one of the biggest
problems is that like when people don't
feel like they want to be pushed they
want to be challenged they want to feel
like they're doing like the best work
that they can do and they want to be
like they want to feel appreciated for
doing that and anytime I see like a
leader do those two things for their
employees they do really really well and
when one of those two things is missing
ie not not keeping junior people not
loving them letting them live up to
their potential and then not expressing
gratitude leads to problems
yeah one of the one of the things it
sounds like in your examples and one of
the things that I've kind of identified
as one of the main problems that causes
interpersonal issues to arrive
especially on the more competitive teams
is just a lack of empathy for teammates
that seems to be other case you know
it's when you grind ranks so much
especially at the higher levels you kind
of become psychologically ingrained when
you're a professional player to you know
be that you are better than every one of
your teammates and every one of your
opponents and resources need to be
funneled into you in order to be
successful you know this happens when
you have grandmasters tall five hundreds
and pro players bidding getting put into
games with like masters players or
something there's you know when you
approach that last edge of the bell
curve every little tiny improvement is a
massive you know exponential increase in
both skill and knowledge and I feel like
a lot of pro players and semi-pro
players to really really struggle to get
out of that mindset because they have
put so many hours into the ranked ladder
before they actually transition into the
competitive mindset on a team and when
you do that out of all of the issues out
of everything that's gone around when
you see kind of teams going up and down
swinging dramatically it's usually it
comes down to kind of trust
communication teamwork and just
confidence in the ability to win I
thought it was so funny that the Houston
outlaws which had like a really really
rough year here pretty much as soon as
the it was announced that they were
being sold like the organization was
being sold to immortals they look like
won some games and it was to me you know
nothing else changed on the team but
it's like hey we're being sold maybe to
somebody who actually has money like
that you know maybe it gave the players
hope or confidence and when they were
feeling stuck otherwise that but just
that kind like mental shift might have
been enough to like get them to win some
game so now that's complete speculation
I don't know anything on the inside but
you know that lack of empathy for trying
to understand something from another
person's perspective especially treating
teammates as equals isn't something that
is very common it's actually quite quite
rare I think within the overwatch League
itself that infuriates me like because
because that was yeah I mean I like not
to
I'm not blaming anyone but I think like
the thing that infuriates me is that
that the theme of I think our or I guess
the view that Jane you and I share is
that things can be taught and and so I
think a big part of of what I do is I
try to teach people how to be empathic
like I try to teach people and I think
this is where you know the Yogi's
realize that like just about everything
about the mind any Faculty of the mind
or anything that a human being can do
can be understood and improved so that
our capacity for empathy our capacity
for creativity our capacity for
concentration you're talking about we're
not talking absolutely we're also not
taught how to concentrate that's just
something we just kind of take for
granted like oh like I'm having trouble
concentrating on studying for this test
I guess I'll try again later like no one
ever looks at like why am I having
trouble concentrating how do you
actually concentrate how do you train
your mind to focus how do you elicit a
flow state how do you learn how to be
empathic how do you learn to dissolve
your ego so I'm developing that's to
teach people especially because you can
solve problems that are binary like
should we do this yes or no but like the
classic problem that always disrupts a
team and you know if you as a team that
can figure out whether or not it was the
composition that is the problem or the
execution of that composition so if you
kind of if you're coach presents a new
composition and you run that composition
and you lose the argument always arises
whether or not the composition was wrong
or whether the execution was wrong and
one of the things that it just seems to
just not be in people's heads it's all
it's what does it call it's not a tooth
not to fact your problem but it's it
doesn't have to be one or the other both
of them can exist but people will always
try and you're they're gonna split in
it's gonna be tribal to you know we just
need to play the comp better or you know
we need to change the comp we executed
it finally first of all you never
executed anything perfectly and even if
the composition was good it's gonna
change and shift in a week anyway
because that's what them that is like
while people are developing and
I still get a rating on each other's
weaknesses yeah Jane you know what the
fascinating thing is there there is a
very clear neuroscience reason why that
happens and there are also very clear
neuroscience ways so there's certain
circuits in your brain that activate
that caused you to be black and white
so like when our limbic system in our
stress system activates our brain is
designed to think in terms of black and
white so normally like when we calmly
approach a problem like we're talking
about this and we're sort of
appreciating all these shades of grey
and I think your main point is that it's
not like strategy or execution they're
elements of both right and and but what
happens is people say like oh like we
had the by composition I assume you mean
more general sense strategy right like
what your comp is going into the game
yes yeah and then in an execution you
can maybe think about as tactics or just
how people played and so the fascinating
thing is when people get stressed out
their mind shuts off the ability to
appreciate shades of gray and that's
actually a survival mechanism so when
we're when we're faced with stress our
body like thinks were under attack
and when it thinks were under attack we
don't want to appreciate shades of gray
we want to make snap judgments and like
go like all in on one thing or another
thing like when we're faced with a tiger
in the jungle we want to go into do we
run or do we fight
everything in between is completely
irrelevant and for the human beings who
sat and appreciated nuance and Shades of
Grey when they faced a tiger you know
what happened to them absolutely they
just they just got gobbled and so what
happens is over millions of years of
evolution our brain is designed to be
like tribal or black-and-white thinking
and the cool thing is that there are
many ways that you can actually disable
that circuit of your brain so one thing
you can do is like actually reduce the
cortisol level in your body because
cortisol is gonna encourage black or
white thinking and cortisol is a stress
hormone this is also really fascinating
so adrenaline is so when when people get
heated and they start to argue and they
start like saying like oh it was
composition oh it was execution so
anytime you start arguing your
adrenaline level is gonna go up your
cortisol level is gonna go up and this
is fascinating so adrenaline actually
causes your peripheral vision to
collapse so our normal field of vision
is a hundred eighty degrees when we have
adrenaline in our system our field of
vision reduces down to thirty degrees
like our physically you can't see
anything except for what's in front of
you and the fascinating thing is that
correlates in my opinion there are fewer
studies about this to cycle
psychologically as well and you're
unable to see like your peripheral
vision when you get pissed off and you
zero in on one problem and you collapse
to like a thirty degree field of vision
and then all you can see is what's in
front of you oh the problem is this
other guy and you can't see anything
else and the really fascinating thing is
when I work with especially groups of
people like I also work with resident
physicians so this is a class of people
that is sort of like you know is the the
nuts and bolts of like what's running
the hospital so myself and my co
residents like we're running like we're
the ones who are taking all the call
shifts so one of us is working every
night or two of us are working every
night to cover in 960 bed hospital and
so what like there's all kinds of stuff
that happens like in terms of the person
that you're on with like if you feel
like they're not pulling your weight
you're gonna feel swamped or if you feel
swamped you reverse engineer the answer
and you say oh that guy's not pulling
his weight because I
feel swamped right like there's there's
like kind of this dyad and if you feel
stressed
you're gonna automatically like blame
the other person for your stress and
then you get into all kinds of other
things like if one person calls in sick
and that stresses everyone else so
there's a fascinating thing that happens
in residency that if one person calls in
sick it makes everyone else more likely
to call in sick because if I have to do
extra work because someone else is sick
well [ __ ] that I'm gonna call in sick
too and it gets to the point the worst
thing that I've ever seen is that when
when people start calling in sick people
start pretending to call in sick to
[ __ ] go to concerts that happened
once in my class and I was livid when I
found out we didn't say anything about
it but like someone's like well [ __ ] I
got called in so like other people can
get called in too it can become super
super toxic so fast so what do you do
about that Jane sure let's switch gears
for a second so I I appreciate that
so let me ask you this and if you're if
you're comfortable talking about this so
you said that you were diagnosed with
something like bipolar - yeah yeah so
you get like a hundred percent
confirmation that that's the case but
it's the working theory and it seems to
fit pretty well so far yeah so I think
that actually a lot of people like
resonated with that actually on on
twitch at and I was kind of curious what
what were you experiencing because I
think a big problem that a lot of people
face is that you know people think that
something that's happening to them is
normal and in a sense it is because
that's just how they've been their
entire life like your entire life I
would guess that you've just had periods
of time of like superhuman productivity
that other people have even been envious
of and then your body has had to like
tip like there's that balancing effect
right so after a period of superhuman
productivity you kind of like your body
has to crash
and that's just who you are it's the way
that you've always worked and so people
don't realize that like just because
you're working that way there's a way to
understand that there's a way to
actually capitalize on that there's a
way to balance that there's a way to
optimize it there's a way to take
advantage of it and there's a way to
like suffer less Oh certainly the like
the hypomania side that bipolar too is
despite being a mental illness as by
definition or something like that it is
very beneficial in cases you know it
does as you describe it at his
superhuman productivity one of the
things is that when I was first trying
to kind of understand the whole bipolar
to nature and you know I'm trying to
deal with it just through
self-regulation and healthy living
instead of I don't want to like medicate
myself I want to understand you to
understand my brain and all that so
but the hypomania side when I was
working on it I was having when I
stepped back from social media I was
having some pretty crippling social
anxiety which is really strange because
you know I've given thesis presentations
in front of the Prime Minister of Canada
and like never been nervous about that
before so for me to get anxiety and like
worry about things it was like this was
new it was that's [ __ ] literally an
anxious person just pause and
appreciating how cool that is
there was the military college it wasn't
anything that's that's [ __ ] cool man
what was your thesis I'm not to derail
me but I can't help myself
I studied aeronautical engineering at
the Royal Military College of Canada and
the fourth-year thesis in that program
is to design an aircraft so what we did
was we took a look at one of the current
platforms that the Air Force used and
we've redesigned it for modern times in
a way that a company could take and
actually produce it and I was the
aerodynamicist on that project that's
cool anyway and now I'm playing eSports
yeah so on when I was working with
working with my therapist to trying to
figure out what was going on with this
anxiety one of the things is that I had
I had well let's start back I'm like
what Beiler bipolar ii looked like to me
and why I didn't figure out that I was
bipolar like why I couldn't tell and why
I never like realize it because it you
know I say this to other people
like oh yeah that makes sense and like
you know people looking at me and me not
looking in the mirror it makes sense to
them but so I always thought that
bipolar as it was described was
something where it was like an
instantaneous shift of mood like with
mid-conversation
I always thought that that was why
people had trouble dealing with bipolar
individuals because in the middle of a
conversation they've got really happy
you're really sad or something like that
I didn't realize that bipolar happened
over the course of numerous days or
weeks or in some cases months and then
you can have these dramatic mood shifts
more gradually like that but you have
the stress of the overwatch league
itself started to compress the frequency
of my mood swings quite quite badly so
if I compress the frequency let's just
let's just pause so what that means is
that you started to fluctuate more
quickly due to stress yes okay okay and
it became a big problem and then so
after that whole situation which I'm
just gonna skip what did happen is that
I was having massive amounts of anxiety
and I couldn't figure out watching can I
ask you to pause for just one second
you're on an awesome rhythm but there's
so much that you're talking about which
i think is just so it's like a goldmine
for people i want to grab just i want to
grab like a notebook real quick and I
just want to jot down a couple of things
which I want to talk or ask about so and
it's just too good to pass up so I have
to interrupt you even though I feel like
that's criminal also I'm gonna just grab
something to drink real quick I'll be
right back
[Music]
you
all right because I think like this what
you're saying so this is you're
absolutely correct about you know people
really misunderstand how quickly and how
slowly bipolar fluctuates and a lot of
people think that bipolar is like
someone who has like mood swings but
that's not where bipolar is and that's a
really important point that I just don't
want to lose along with everything else
you're saying okay
anyway please continue so I was I was
when I came back from my break and I
started to try and work with Dallas
again in stage four I was having anxiety
attacks and panic attacks and they were
really kind of weird in the fact that I
would feel them coming like it's just
something I could feel my body chemistry
shift and I could be like oh here we go
and I'd have to go over to my general
manager and be like hey I need to go to
my apartment I'm about to have a panic
attack
or Inc I don't know what the difference
between anxiety attack or panic attack
is I just know it's like [ __ ] that's
what it did so he'd help me we go to my
apartment and I kind of wait for it all
to blow over but working through the
therapist what I what I had realized is
basically that I had been kind of locked
into the depressive state for a while
and I had kind of considered that to be
my normal and then when the I step back
and I D stressed and I self-regulated
again started being healthier my body
was trying to go into the hypomanic
state move out a diversion but I hadn't
been there for so long I was fighting
against the mood correction into the
positive territory but when you say
fighting against what does that mean
it's so just a bipolar - I still I'm
aware of my mood and in control of my
mood so it's not like I ever lost
control or awareness over my actions or
anything like that and the fact that you
know if I was like super happy and
excited and I wanted to just dance in
the middle of the room like I could just
sit there and be like a normal person
and pretend to be a professional you
know it's like so things of that variety
is that you know despite my my body
wanting to basically stand up and dance
I could force myself to sit in that
chair and do work but that's you are
having you were having like these like
impulses and you would control the
release its impulses it doesn't sound
like the right bird to me at all it's
okay kind of like I would just I had
energy okay and I wanted to you know I
was energetic and wanted to do something
a little bit more stimulating than
whatever I was doing it okay basically
and then fighting against that is what
the therapist suggested might have been
causing the anxiety so she suggested
that basically I stopped trying to
like that and just like you know be okay
with whatever state of energy my body
wants to be at and so I did the next
time I felt an anxiety attack coming on
I'm like finally your therapist is very
good yeah she is
Thank You Dallas but yeah so I just let
it ride I let the anxiety attack right I
didn't try and fight it I wasn't worried
about it and then what had happened is
that after that that's the first time
that I entered a hypomanic state again
and I worked for like 35 hours straight
which was not healthy and my therapist
did not like that but I was like I was
having a blast and I must have gotten
like two weeks worth of work done it's
like 35 hours and then I basically
collapsed physically I gave out mentally
I was just wanted to keep working so
that was kind of like the first time
that was the kind of realizing what the
anxiety was it was like my body wanted
to be happy but I'd been unhappy for so
long that I was fighting against it
though and since then like I've been
putting a lot of that energy into
self-regulating working out eating
healthier like you know it is kind of
nice when I post a photo on Instagram or
like people like wow are you looking
good it's like yeah I've got all this
energy and I kind of realized that you
do look good by the way thank you
the last time I saw you yes you look so
much better thank you your face has
something called orgeous in it oh just
something weird is happening
can you still hear me yeah so you have
something called Oh Jess I don't
understand something weird just happened
in my twitch chat but uh so gorgeous is
like glow is how it gets translated so
you have like a glow in your face like
and you look it wasn't there last time
yeah it's it's been well the last time
you saw me was yeah probably right in
the middle of that so where was I oh
basically like when I am in a hypomanic
state and being really productive it
feels like I'm a candle burning from
both ends and that I can feel the
physical toll of being that productive
takes on the fact that I'm pretty aware
that if I let myself work at maximum
capacity that I'd shorten my life span
there's no real other way to put it so
I've been in order to my way of coal
regulating has kind of been putting that
energy into keeping myself alive by
staying healthy making sure I'm working
out and eating and now introspection
meditation things like that but it's
been an unmarked increase in quality of
life yeah so I'm gonna I want to ask you
a question but um I need to figure out
how do I turn off the sound for gifts
subs as someone just gifted a hundred
subs I don't know what that means okay
but that's what it looks it looks
significant but I gotta figure out can
somebody help me you have you have a
browser source ah yes
I don't know what that means or what are
you using to streams I'm using a stream
labs OBS so you'll find it in one of the
I don't know stream labs OBS
specifically but look at one of the
sources and you should be ok mute a
source individually
[Music]
I don't know okay who is it I'm gonna
open your Twitter stream
it's this guy named Lodi PM so at first
I thought it was a hack because like
when someone starts spamming all that
[ __ ] in my twitch it means someone is
hacking stream waves calm
I'm so sorry guys like Jane this is just
pure gold man you're just your journey
is so good like I I think it's some
is unable to find that person but like
the problem is my thing is like dinging
every few seconds oh yeah it's not the
person it's it'll have sent a stream
Labs and stream Labs is sending you
those alerts so you can it's not wait
like you can't do anything which either
you have to do it through the stream
labs dashboard on the browser or in the
stream labs OBS streaming program okay
let me see the browser source for it
okay are you conditioning a lot in the
stream line also just please I've
actually did donate the hundred subs
thank you so much yeah I mean I thank
you I wanna support it's huge
and I think I think Jane thank you
because I think like what so I like I
think what you're sharing right now is
so important
okay hold on did this stop we done okay
I think we're so thank you very much for
everyone who subscribed and followed I
don't get a chance to thank you guys
enough and I think Jane like honestly
like this story is so classic and is
brilliant um so thank you so much for
sharing it I didn't mean to derail you
by talking about orgeous but I'm getting
really excited because I think you're
you're doing this in such an awesome way
like the way that first of all the way
that you discovered this the way that
you recognized that this is actually who
you've been your entire life and there's
so many elements to this like I don't
want to cut you off but you were saying
that you know people are saying that
you're looking better now so so tell us
a little bit about how you're doing now
oh yeah it's just like so I've been like
you know ever since I kind of figured
out this and I've actually been able to
self-regulate a little bit I haven't
actually been on the downside of bipolar
since August 18th now so I'm over two
months maintaining kind of like positive
mood state which is I like it
are you hypomanic or you just kind of
miss no hypomanic yeah I put my had for
two months now yeah how much are you
sleeping every night about five hours
usually so it does yeah that's always
the first question so at first it was
down to three hours just because the
energy persisted even through dreams
which is really weird and wonky but
since then since I've been able to
actually kind of through meditation be
able to self-regulate a little bit more
you know five hours five six hours is
probably average and then you know if I
really push myself then yeah if I like
if I exhaust myself then we can sleep
for a normal eight hours or so
okay so I think
a couple of things that I want to ask
you so the first is so I'm noticing that
you're kind of attached to your bipolar
- does that make sense yes because it's
been kind of the starting point for me
to figure out things that have actually
made marked improvements you know it's a
I've always been very cautious against
self diagnosis you know invests at the
same time it's you know that the DSM and
diagnostic manuals so I was very kind of
honest with my therapist be like you
know like what is this what are you
thinking like you know don't give me the
Coles notes potions like what do you
actually they just speak honestly sort
of thing but yeah the reason that I kind
of refer to bipolar 2 and hypomania as
much as I do is just because in looking
at how its treated and reading the
stories about how other people have
managed it I've found clues that have
helped me live a better life so it's not
like I I don't like to identify I don't
think I've ever actually mentioned
hypomania on my own social medias before
I've mentioned bipolar 2 once in a
youtube video and I specifically
mentioned then that I didn't want to be
known as the guy with bipolar so like I
don't make any public references to it
this is just because your memoir is why
I mention it so much yeah so I'm glad
you do because I think the first thing
to recognize it's funny so like um you
know a guy named Evan Nash by chance I
don't know okay so III was he's he's
also like uh he was CEO of counter logic
gaming a couple of years ago and so it's
still like sort of in the esports kind
of film but so I was talking to Devin on
Friday and the really fascinating thing
is that like so we were talking about
his sense of inadequacy and he really is
attached to a sense of inadequacy
because he feels like it's responsible
for his success and that his inadequacy
fuels him forward because he's never
like satisfied with himself in that that
causes him to move forward and I think
that the really fascinating thing that
I've noticed about working with people
who have I don't really like to call it
mental illness I think it's just a part
of them right so like what I work with
people with anxiety they - like they
don't want to lose
their anxiety and the people who are the
most attached to their quote-unquote
mental illness are actually people with
bipolar too because they don't want to
give us this there's quite a few people
out there who credit hypomania to their
success in their field or the career
it's not so at least from my own
research that's not a unique experience
it's this legitimate Lee it does make me
more productive not not only is it
legitimately that not only is it an
uncommon experience I would argue it is
like a very common experience and and
once again when we're talking about
undergrads at Harvard College like they
are there because of their bipolar -
they are there because they can go two
months sleeping four hours a night and
study their asses off and enjoy it
and enjoy because they feel great and
then when the other shoe Falls you know
they feel offer awful their productivity
drops but they're still able to sustain
it just like you have like I'm hearing
that you needed to take a break from
time to time and it's also sounds like
you've been sort of struggling with this
cycle for many years and yet you've
become overwhelmingly professionally
successful like you were in the Air
Force you're you know you've been in
eSports like you can't you can't drop
off the face of the earth for like two
months in eSports and have a job when
you come back you just can't
so you manage the lows or maybe I'm
making assumptions but I don't I mean
that hasn't been my experience cuz if
just I mean the league is two years old
so to like drop off the face of things
for like five percent of the time that
the league has been existence I don't
think you can stop yeah I took do it
because I'm I'm large enough that you
know I can come back it's like my spot
isn't okay I know I'm no longer
competing for my spot so I literally can
disappear off social media for two
months and then come back but for you
know for most people who are still on
the grind I don't listen to myself on
the grind anymore and the first thing
things to do but I'm not competing
against others at this point yeah so
that's that's actually a wonderful
stress-free sort of way at looking at
things that's something that I'd like to
dive into but I just have too many
things written down in my notebook so
the first thing that I kind of want to
let people understand is that a lot of
the negative things we experience in our
mind and a lot of the things that
actually cause us suffering and
difficulty actually like help us out in
a very important way so you know anxiety
in a weird way is like a protective
mechanism right because it keeps you
from getting hurt so like if you're
giving a presentation let's say to the
Prime Minister of Canada and you have
social anxiety you don't want to look
like an idiot in front of the Prime
Minister of Canada so you don't speak
but in a weird way like that's actually
helping you out like it's protecting you
from looking like an idiot in front of
the Prime Minister Minister of Canada
for people who have bipolar to their
periods of hypomania allow them to work
for 35 35 hours at a stretch really
sounds a little bit more like mania but
the standard the standard you know
bipolar to sort of pattern is like
sleeping five hours a night and being
like pretty damn productive while you're
awake
right so normally like most human beings
and some people can get get by with like
4 to 6 hours of sleep but but most human
beings need a solid 8 hours and if they
get less than that their productivity
really drops so the first thing I want
people to understand is that like in the
same way that that Jane and I were
talking about black and white thinking
like is bizarre as the sounds I'm not
saying that mental illness is a good
thing in any way but at the same time
understand that a lot of your negative
mental patterns are doing something for
you even if we look at something like
video game addiction video game
addiction is doing something for you
that's why you do it so much right
people who are addicted to video games
and escape from the world through
playing video games like that's what
it's doing it's protecting you from the
consequences of the real world and so
the first thing in in Devon's inadequacy
is fueling him towards material success
the first thing to understand is that
you know we classify mental illness is
all bad and I I'm not saying that people
should go around trying to be bipolar
I'm not saying that I think you can be
free from anxiety like that so what I
work towards and at the same time
understand that it's like not all a
negative thing and that it's usually
doing something for in some cases like
schizophrenia or you know really bad
depression I find it hard to understand
exactly what it's doing for you um but
you know for a lot of people like if you
have some kind of mental pattern like we
had someone else on a couple weeks ago
who is talking about how they always end
up dating someone who's emotionally like
oh sorry like so who's someone like
their their parents and they're sort of
like emotionally unavailable and that
can be the kind of thing that feels
painful and causes suffering and is
actually doing something for so what I
really like about your story Jane is
that you're acknowledging that like even
though this has been a struggle for you
and it's been hard and not that it's
good but that you recognize that there
are parts of this that you really don't
want to give up right yes so I'm getting
also a lot of questions about you know
what's true bipolar versus mood swings
and I think you opened up with this
which was awesome so people toss around
the word bipolar and you were saying
that you know you didn't realize that
bipolar is something that happens
mood shift happens over the course of
days or even weeks you were kind of
envisioning someone who's like really
happy one minute and is like throwing
[ __ ] the next minute yeah and I was
envisioning also somebody who is hard to
communicate with or was like socially
awkward and I do not consider myself
that kind of person so that was another
reason at least in my head I was like
all of you have mood swings that must
make you like you know not very much fun
at parties or you know yes perhaps in
the work environment or things like that
but no that's a great point right so we
also have conceptions of what mental
health looks like and since we don't
feel like the stuff on TV looks we think
that that's not really what's going on
so like even when you look at like
schizophrenia for example on on TV like
it's perceived in a very particular way
or like you know even stuff like
addiction is like perceived in like a
very like kind of almost like glamorous
way like it's like really high highs and
really low lows and like this really
like noble struggle against addiction
whereas for the most part addiction is
like a slaw it's like just really
[ __ ] boring okay if you made a TV
show about someone with addiction it
would be like them waking up maybe going
to a job maybe not going to a job coming
home and then feeding their addiction
and it's like just like West Wing it's
yeah so it's not Leo McGarry for us from
West Wing right like oh yeah no no
because Leo McGarry is like he's like
it's a noble it's a noble like they
don't actually show him so if you want
to really see that's a great example so
if you want to see the real like what
addiction really looks like it would be
six seasons of West Wing where Leo
McGarry is sitting in a room and
drinking alcohol every episode that's
what real addiction looks like Leo
McGarry is a noble guy who's productive
and has this kind of romanticized
struggle with addiction where they show
this really powerful scene where he's
like drinking and relapses and stuff
like that and his friends kind of come
in and support him real addiction is
just [ __ ] boring to watch
just [ __ ] bore
I think about people who are addicted to
video games like that's not glamorous
you just wake up every day and you start
like you're queueing for overwatch and
you just play overwatch all day and then
like you switch to dota and you switch
to loll then you go to sleep and then
you wake up and you do it the next day
it's not romanticized at all
in that same way so it kind of I think
I've sorry for going off on a tangent
but what I wanted to share with people
is like so so one of the biggest things
that I think Jane learned which is very
important to understand is that bipolar
doesn't mean mood swings so a lot of
people like I hear people that come into
my office and they'll say like oh my my
son is bipolar so it'll be like a parent
and bipolar that means that he'll be
like playing video games one minute and
the next minute he's like throwing [ __ ]
because they like unplug his internet
that's not bipolar that's not so bipolar
doesn't mean mood swings so mood
reactivity is a different thing so there
are some people who have like very high
degrees of mood reactivity so their mood
can swing from like one one thing to
another thing over the course of 5
minutes or an hour 2 hours
bipolar in depression is persistent
periods of mood that lasts in the case
of bipolar one week or more like pretty
much most days all day everyday kind of
thing or in the case of depression like
two weeks at a stretch so if you're
super depressed for a weekend and are
fine on Monday morning like that's not
major depressive disorder that's not
clinical depression that's not really
bipolar so true depression or bipolar
involved periods of mood that lasts days
at a time or even weeks or even months
up to about a year in the case of
depression that's one thing so mood
swings different the second thing that I
wanted to point out is that it sounds
like you've had this pattern for your
entire life and also that certain things
use the word stress from overwatch
compressed the swings that's okay
something that you know I don't know if
there was any other sort of
physiological changes that cause the the
fluctuations to accelerate but that's at
least as far as I can tell what caused
it to accelerate there so yeah it's go
ahead I'm going to just say this
once and I'll say it a thousand more
times if you think something is going on
chances are you're right
so one of the biggest lessons that I've
learned as a psychiatrist is I can train
as much as I want to I can read as many
books or studies as much as I want to
and if a patient walks into my office
and they say I think this is what's
going on like 90% chance that's what's
going on
and so like sure there could be like
weird neuroscience or physiologic things
but because what I realized is that most
people like actually like have a good
instinct for like what's going on with
themselves
and so stress absolutely does cause
these things to worsen and in terms of
worsen there are a couple of different
dimensions in which stress can cause
things stores and one is that it can
make your lows lower it can make your
highs higher it can make them more
calcified and harder to move or it can
accelerate the the cycling process and
the cycling process is essentially like
an attempt to balance and if you think
about like you know if you let's say
like you're you're like sailing a boat
and then you get hit by a huge wave
which is like a stress and then your
boat starts to rock and if you try to
like overcompensate you're gonna make
things worse and then you're
overcompensating again and it's almost
like you know when people say that if
you lose control of a car you should let
go in the direction of the skin because
if you if you go against the skid you're
gonna just like you're gonna fishtail
and you're gonna like actually end up
worse right so the really fascinating
thing is when our when our body goes
under a period or a brain goes under a
period of stress sometimes our body
tries too hard to overcompensate we try
too hard to control things and it just
makes things worse which is why I think
that your therapist is so [ __ ]
brilliant because what she said is that
like your anxiety or panic is actually
coming is a manifestation of
inappropriately dealing with something
else that you have this excessive energy
which needs to come out and you're not
letting it come out and since it can't
go out one way it's gonna blow a gasket
somewhere over here so like I want you
guys so I want you guys to envision so
envision Jane like a closed system that
has pressure building up and he's got
this impulse like he's got this pressure
valve on this one side which is to get
up and dance and that's what he wants to
do
and if you don't open that pressure
valve and the pressure and the system
keeps building up like what's gonna
happen Jane increased heart rate you
know you're gonna start fidgeting you're
gonna start having frantic thoughts yeah
and your system is gonna blow a gasket
somewhere else like if you don't let
that pressure out it's gonna manifest
somewhere else
and I'll give you guys like another
great example of this so I I had a one
of my teachers once taught me something
really awesome about depression which is
that the source of depression is anger
turns against the self
and that that depression really like
finds its roots and like anger towards
yourself and when you can't express that
anger towards yourself when you can't
metabolize or process that anger about
yourself it transforms into depression
and in your case go ahead I just tell
you the cause of mine you know I keep
talking about being a pilot in the Air
Force but in my final year of university
I was hit by a car at night it was a
hit-and-run I got injured and I ended up
pushing out in my last year and then
because I was at the military college
not only did that lose my trade but also
my degree so that was kind of the cause
of you know it was and I was angry at
myself for having failed Yeah right
because it mine yeah which is which is
crazy because like you got hit by
someone right and yet somehow you you
get angry at yourself and that anger
sort of like in an alchemical process
like gets transmuted into depression and
so something about sort of this internal
energy that you had got like
alchemically transmuted into anxiety
so yeah like I said this is just pure
gold for me so the next thing is is you
were saying like you're not sure what
the difference between anxiety and panic
is so I'm gonna just talk for a second
about that
so anxiety is generally like worrying
about stuff so when I think about
anxiety like I think like I so my
classic question for whether someone has
anxieties I just ask them are you a
worrier so Jane are you a worrier no I
don't mean warrior I mean like wor ril
are know yeah so if you worry about
stuff then chances are you're gonna be
prone to anxiety yeah oh oh warrior is
different warrior and would it be if I
use the accent it is easier to
understand and so what we think about is
panic is usually discrete episodes so
like people who have anxiety generally
like worry all the time like you were
talking about social anxiety right so
like those like if you're if you become
socially anxious like if you're in the
right setting like your mind is just
gonna be worrying somewhat constantly
does that make sense
whereas panic is usually like a discrete
episode of you know can last an hour
maybe even to of like highly elevated
heart rate like sweating stuff like that
you can get that in social anxiety as
well but panic is sort of like episodic
in nature and anxiety is generally like
is a more general like experience over a
prolonged period of time
um
yeah so that's what I that's that's
that's what I got yeah so from from that
definition it would have been social
anxiety just general tolerant and then
it it would have been panic attacks yeah
absolutely so I think I think the word
attack is actually really good because
that implies like an episode so when
people talk about it I think they're
having panic attacks yeah so it's like a
discrete period of you know really
strong like overwhelming emotions in
that moment so I'm gonna ask so Jane
anything else you want to mention or any
questions that you have I mean it's a
the story spans months so you know it's
wherever you want to go so I was
actually thinking maybe we could do some
Q&A and we'll see if people have
questions for you or me sure and the
other thing that I want to do is is
I want to teach some meditation today
and I just let me I've got
I got 13 minutes okay perfect so let's
do questions yeah so I'm gonna say well
so let's see if people have questions
for Jane let's start there
and then I'll do meditation afterward
and thanks for coming on by the way my
pleasure you know it's something like
this that happens me I just know that
I'm not unique in this regard and I I
see a world where we are giving these
young kids you don't know much about the
world don't have soft skills aren't
learning psychology aren't you know
being introspective or really kind of
caring about themselves that either
they're gonna go through these
breakdowns and similar struggles or
they're gonna leave the league and
something like you know maybe they have
one really successful year and they
sacrificed everything to get where they
are and then you know I don't know what
this dive in with the NBA of all the
players going bankrupt after they left
but I do think that you know I've been
almost using the term dream Harvester
it's kind of like you know people are
sacrificing a lot for their dreams and
even when they get them it might not be
what's good for them so I want to kind
of make sure that mental health
especially in eSports is something
that's talked more about and that you
know so that when people do kind of run
into these sort of times in their lives
that they are either more well prepared
for it or at least have resources that
they can go to to try and self educate
um what is molding me mad plus balding
put together
someone is I think someone is trolling
you yes be modeling to be a good coat
yes it helps hi
it sounded like a troll kind of question
but I wasn't sure what it meant but it's
a good of an illegitimate question I'm
the knight sir it's a common slang it's
being thrown around - just like mess
with the balding streamers I think
yeah but I mean that's dick man that's
dick it's the Internet
yeah
um okay so so risker asks why do you
think that players burn out so quickly
in eSports compared to other stuff
but it's like there's a long which
there's a long list of reasons that I
could answer here but each did every
single one because you know everybody's
different everybody's gonna burn out for
a different reason
I think think that
I'm gonna go with a little bit of a
weird one one that I think is actually
really impactful but nobody is talking
about and I think it's the lack of role
models for the players in that the
players themselves are role models but a
lot of them don't have role models of
their own you know some players have
very supportive parents and that's good
but probably the majority of parents are
not supportive or are not involved in
the eSports athletes you know career
choice especially when you're having
Korean players come over to America or
Europe you know not only are they
separated from their parents and also
but from their culture you have some
people who started playing video games
because they had a rocky relationship
with their parents so you're having this
situation where these people are the
best in the world and they're being
looked up to by kind of the next
generation they're expected to kind of
be perfect be a good example but
nobody's taught them how to do those
things and that pressure can really get
to people so I think I think it's going
to be the lack of role models that the
current professional players have that
is a fantastic answer
that's brilliant what are some of the
other things that kind of come to your
mom
some people just want to play games and
get paid for them they don't actually
want to be the best so when they get to
the league they stop trying and then
another one is that people's motivations
to be the best is to be better than
other people rather than be better than
themselves and both of those are also
pretty catastrophic once you make it to
the league yeah so
so that a couple of things so one is
just want to pay and play and get paid I
think that's something that I don't
a really interesting observation as far
as people wanting to be better than
others and not better than themselves
that's actually something that I think
once again there's a lot of psychology
neuroscience and actual interventions
that you can do to fix so right now I'm
trying to develop two years ago I
developed sort of an evidence-based or
scientifically based meditation regimen
for addiction so we have like we know
from like different kinds of fMRI
studies and things like that that
there's some deficiencies or
vulnerabilities in the brain of people
who have addictions and we also know
that meditation affects the brain in
different ways so can we sort of look at
what we understand about the brain and
develop a meditation regimen that
specifically targets the weaknesses for
people who have addiction and the answer
is yes and now actually what I'm working
on because I think this is actually way
more fascinating is a regimen to target
narcissist in ego
and my experience has been that like
when you target narcissism and ego it
cultivates so it gets rid of that sort
of my value or my sense of self is based
on a relationship to others the second
thing it gets rid of or the second thing
it does is it starts to cultivate
empathy because if you think about like
your an identity that's based on a
relationship to others it's all like
very egocentric and so you don't the
only reason that you think about other
people is not to like think about what
their experience is like their value in
your life is to use as a measuring stick
for yourself you don't really think
about them as human beings you just
think about them as like objects to beat
they become milestones instead of people
and and I think it's really fascinating
because this this is also very prevalent
and investment-banking
because everyone is sort of like you
have bonuses right so people get
salaries which is like 50% and then
people get bonuses of like you know
anywhere between a hundred and like a
million dollars a year and when you when
you're sort of fake figuring out how
much you're value do you compare your
bonus to other people
and as long as you're kind of doing that
that can be very hard on your ego it can
be very like fueling for your ego and it
can cause a lot of suffering I think
that's huge in terms of you know don't
try to be better than anyone else
because that's sort of like an
egotistical kind of thing and like there
are ways to dissolve that ego which I
think at the same time is going to
improve empathy it's a fascinating any
other thoughts so you mentioned lack of
rome role models some people just want
to play and they want to get paid and
then people who want to be better than
others as opposed to better than
themselves those are probably the main
three that yeah yeah you know there's
obviously like not caring about your
physical health or thinking that
physical health has no bearing on a game
performance like I don't know why that
myth still exists yeah it's a very
common it's like you know if you sleep
and drink water and work out you're
gonna play better
and people are like no I just need to
play yeah you know you know why they
think that Jane because they've never
cared about their physical health and
look how far they got yeah no kidding
right right so I once heard a great
there's a great kind of quote about the
NBA so I think the hardest moment in a
coach's life is when you go into a
championship game at halftime or maybe
this is the NFL you go into the champion
you go to the Super Bowl at halftime and
tell your team that the strategy is you
so you're down at halftime in the Super
Bowl the hardest speech a coach has ever
had to give is going into the the locker
room at halftime of the Super Bowl when
you're down and telling your team the
strategy that got you to this point is
not working
I feel like why don't they prioritize
his physical health because I haven't
had to yeah subsisting off of Doritos
Pizza and Mountain Dew has gotten them
this far
why would they change
um so I guess so a question to Jane so
cannabis asks you talked about people
being inefficient learners how would you
suggest people learn people approach
learning over watch
run towards the fear is the phrase that
I really like in that there's a lot of
pros who actually don't know how some of
the characters in the game work and I
don't understand how that's acceptable
or even becomes a thing but what running
towards the fear means is that if
something annoys you or frustrates you
or you think it's overpowered or or
underpowered for example learning the
extremes or the things that kind of
stick out to you like it's no zenyatta
players for example people who one trick
heroes like Zenyatta for example they
become very susceptible to being killed
by flankers for example and they as any
other player is always going to think
that Genji and tracer and Sombra are
overpowered pieces of [ __ ] but what you
should do is if you're are playing that
hero and you're you know you hate that
thing you fear that thing it just didn't
always you with frustrates you just play
those heroes and try and assassinate
Zen's and you'll learn from the other
perspective what it looks like it
becomes it gains you the ability to
empathize with your opponent and empathy
doesn't have to be a good thing but
there's also the way that people
approach a game psychologically in terms
of winning competitive battles
one-on-one 66's because they always try
to force always try to force something
to happen and they never try and coax
then ever trying to coax the opponent
into doing something that they want to
in the absence of force and in order to
properly coax an opponent you need to be
able to empathize with them
that's that's awesome Joe um that is a
another principle which I haven't talked
about yet but I work with a lot which is
the difference between creation and
cultivation so I think our our society
has has gotten to the point where we
always try to create something and we've
forgotten the value of cultivate
and a lot of the change that I advocate
or is not is not for people to create
change in their life but to cultivate
change and I think what you just said
about forcing versus coaxing is to
understand that like some of the best
ways to do things in life are not to
actually like zero in and shoot for it
gung-ho which is sort of what our
society kind of propagates but to like
let things grow
anyway I think we're at time for today
so thanks for coming on Jane and
you know any any closing thoughts that
you have no I just I hope everyone
enjoyed it and yeah I mean I think it
was awesome I think people are loving it
everybody saying you is that your next
level wise and a smart guy I appreciate
that but if I was the you know also also
you got us a hundred gift subs from Lodi
p.m. so that was I mean I've never seen
that I literally thought someone was
getting hacked that's funny but no like
one of the one of the most important
things that I would encourage anyone to
do is think about how you're thinking
and learn how to learn that's the number
one piece of advice I'd give anyone who
wants to improve it something or become
a master of any task
completely agree man so thank you so
much for coming on you know good luck
with everything you're doing with Team
Canada and Dallas fuel and then you know
if there's any way that that we can
support you in terms of any of this
stuff I know we talked a little bit
about like eSports stuff but if you guys
want to like learn meditation I just let
me know and then the last thing is you
know when when you are ready to reveal
things in terms of your secret projects
if there's any way any way that we can
support you or help spread the word or
think like that um you know I started
streaming on Twitch about a month ago
but things are growing slowly and
steadily and so if there's any way that
we can help you because I I mean I agree
a hundred percent with your missions I
think that that's I mean what I loved
about going to India and studying to
become a monk is that like Yoga is the
system that teaches you how your mind
works like it teaches you like where new
desires come from why do thoughts happen
where how do behaviors function like how
does all this stuff inside you work it's
like a formal class on the self and so
of anything to support that mission of
helping people like learn how they think
and to think how about their thinking
and to learn about how they learn is
something that I'm 100% in favor
but thanks a lot man thanks for having
me on enjoy the rest year stream take
care good luck right now
[Music]